This morning, we’re discussing
this illustration that Jesus gave
concerning the unrighteous steward.
Of course, it’s found at Luke 16:1-8.
What is the real lesson
behind this illustration that Jesus gave?
Well, it’s interesting to note
that many people get distracted
even before they find out what the lesson is.
How is that so?
Well, when they’re reading the Scriptures
and read chapter 15 of Luke,
they see what has been described
as one of the most powerful illustrations
Jesus ever gave
—that of the so-called prodigal son,
or the wasteful son.
And then as they read on
they come to this illustration
which has been described
as one of the most
puzzling illustrations Jesus gave.
Why are so many people concerned
or puzzled by this illustration?
Well, some people feel
that Jesus is supporting and condoning
the dishonest use of funds.
But is that really the case?
Should we get distracted,
wondering why Jesus used this illustration?
Well, as Bible students,
it’s always good for us
to see what the Bible says.
So let’s take our Bibles
and turn together to Luke chapter 16.
And then rather than having
a preconceived idea,
let’s see what Jesus actually said,
as recorded here in Luke 16.
Reading verse 1, it says:
“Then he also said to the disciples:
“‘A rich man had a steward
who was accused
of handling his goods wastefully.’”
Now, here’s the first question.
We notice, this man—
Jesus doesn’t say he was found condemned
or he was actually doing something
that had been proven to be wrong,
but it mentions here that he was accused.
The Watchtower
made the interesting comment
that this doesn’t necessarily mean to say
he did something wrong,
but he was accused of it.
In fact, the Greek that was used here
to record this illustration
allows for the fact
that perhaps he could have been slandered.
And what was he accused of?
Well, notice the last words there in verse 1:
“of handling his goods wastefully.”
So he wasn’t accused of stealing
but using things wastefully.
It’s interesting to note
that the word used here for “wastefully”
is the same word that’s used
in the previous illustration
of the prodigal son
in chapter 15, verse 13,
where it speaks of the prodigal son
squandering the inheritance.
Now, in that case,
the prodigal, or wasteful, son
didn’t steal the money
from his father, did he?
He received it in a legal way.
But then,
the point was that he squandered it.
So likewise, here we see
that this steward was accused
of wastefully using what was the master’s.
Well, let’s consider
what he was told in verse 2:
“So he called him and said,
‘What is this I hear about you?
“‘Hand in the account of your stewardship,
for you can no longer manage the house.’”
So, what did the master say to the steward?
Did he say to him:
‘You’re going to prison’
or ‘We’re going to have a court case’?
No.
In fact,
he didn’t even immediately remove him
from that position of authority.
But what did he say to him?
You need to “hand in the account.”
So in other words,
the manager didn’t really know
what the steward was doing,
but he allowed him the opportunity now
to hand in this account.
So when we look at the background
of what actually was said here,
and when we think of it from the viewpoint
of those who listen to Jesus,
it seems that what the steward had done
and then proceeded to do
was actually legitimate and legal.
He was concerned about his future.
If he knew that he had to hand in an account
that would result in him going to prison,
then certainly he probably
wouldn’t have acted the way that he did.
But this raises some questions, doesn’t it?
Perhaps we might think:
‘Well, he went ahead
‘and reduced the debts of various ones.
Wasn’t that the wrong thing to do?’
Well, to get the true understanding of this,
it’s good for us to take note
of the November Watchtower  of this year.
And in the section that says “Did You Know?,”
it tells us there what was involved
with a steward’s responsibility.
In Biblical times, apparently,
a steward could be the manager
or the one who ran a household or an estate.
Oftentimes, the owner
would just leave everything
completely to the steward to care for.
All that he was interested in
was the final results.
Would he get a profit or not?
Now, it’s interesting
that in this Watchtower  article,
it mentions the case of Joseph.
What do we remember
from what Genesis chapter 39 tells us?
It says that Potiphar left everything
in Joseph’s control.
And he had no thought of anything
except the food that he was receiving.
So here we have a situation
where the steward is a manager of an estate.
The master really isn’t concerned
with all the details of what’s happening,
at least up to this point,
and he still has authority.
So those that were listening to Jesus
—what may they have thought about?
Well, we don’t know for sure.
But perhaps they may have thought
of this steward reducing the interest rate.
Or perhaps he reduced
his personal commission
that was originally put on these loans.
Or perhaps originally in his enthusiasm,
he overcharged them,
and now he was reducing it
down to the normal price.
Whatever the case,
we know that a steward who is a manager,
like many managers today,
has the right to write off
certain debts completely
and even forgive certain debts.
So, obviously, then,
as The Watchtower  pointed out,
this steward still had full control
and had the responsibility and the authority
to be able to make
whatever changes he saw fit.
So that begs the question,
Was he dishonest?
Well, when we read a number
of versions of the Bible in English,
they actually say the “dishonest steward”
and they use the term “dishonest.”
But let’s have a look and see again
what the Bible actually says.
The New World Translation
very accurately translates it
this way in verse 8:
“And his master commended the steward,
though unrighteous.”
You see, it doesn’t say “dishonest.”
It doesn’t say he was a thief.
“Though unrighteous,
because he acted with practical wisdom.”
So when we think of this,
this steward didn’t do the right thing.
That’s what “unrighteous” means.
It is a very broad statement.
And what would have been
the right thing to do?
To do things for the master.
But in this case,
he was doing something for himself.
Now, some Bible translators
have tried to capture that thought.
Let me read you one example.
It says, ‘His boss acknowledged
that the business manager
‘who had permitted
the invoices to be changed
had acted cleverly
in his own selfish interest.’
Do we know exactly all the details
behind what Jesus was saying?
No.
But what does this help us to see?
Don’t jump to conclusions.
Read what the scripture says,
and don’t get distracted
by details that could take away
from the beautiful lesson
that we should gain.
And what is the lesson?
Jesus tells us.
Let’s look in verse 9:
“Also, I say to you:
Make friends for yourselves
“by means of the unrighteous riches,
“so that when such fail,
they may receive you
into the everlasting dwelling places.”
What’s the lesson?
We need to use our assets,
our material assets,
in a way that makes friends
with Jehovah and Jesus.
That results in something good.
And we noticed there in verse 9
that it says: “when [these] fail.”
It doesn’t say “if.”
And we realize, as Jehovah’s servants,
that eventually the commercial systems
of this world will fail.
Whatever money we have,
whatever assets we have
—it’s just like with this steward—
they don’t really belong to us,
and soon we’re not going to have them to use.
So, surely, we would want to use them
to Jehovah’s praise
and to make friends with Jehovah.
So, what assets do Bethelites have?
Well, we have our own personal assets,
few as they may be.
But also, we make use
of the assets of the organization.
Remember, we may not be tempted
to be dishonest with those assets,
but could we be wasteful with those assets?
Well, that brings us to the final thought
in verse 10, where Jesus said:
“The person faithful in what is least
“[that is with regard
to material things and assets]
“is faithful also in much,
“and the person unrighteous in what is least
is unrighteous also in much.”
What’s the lesson?
Don’t get distracted by details.
Step back and see
what the illustration is telling us.
And in this case, it’s a beautiful reminder
that we should use whatever we have
to Jehovah’s glory.